This report, on which the technical team makes its monetary policy recommendation, will be published the business day following the meeting of the Board of Directors in the months of January, April, July and October.
In the first quarter, annual inflation (8.5%) continued to increase and once again exceeded the forecasts of the market average and the Bank's technical team. So far this year, all the large baskets of the consumer price index (CPI) have accelerated, and as of March their annual variations are above 3%. The food group (25.4%) continued to be the one that contributed the most to the increase in inflation, affected, in large part, by deteriorations in external supply and by increasing costs of agricultural inputs. The increase in the prices of some public services (energy and gas) and transportation explained the acceleration in the regulated basket (8.3%). For its part, the greater persistence of supply and external cost shocks, the effects of indexation, the accumulated inflationary pressures coming from the exchange rate and a closure of excess productive capacity faster than expected would explain the increase in inflation without food or regulated items (4.5%). Within this last basket, upward external pressures have significantly impacted the group of goods (6.4%), which has been accelerating since the last quarter of 2021. In the case of services (3.8%). , its annual variation above the goal is mainly due to the behavior of meals outside the home (14.1%), affected by the sharp increase in the prices of food, public services and the current legal monthly minimum wage ( SMMLV). The prices of leases and other services are registering increasing increases, although still less than 3%.
The inflation forecast and expectations increased and remain above the target as a consequence, in part, of more persistent external pressures (prices and costs) than estimated in the January Report. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has intensified these upward pressures, particularly on international prices of some agricultural goods and inputs, energy and oil. Thus, the new inflation projection assumes international food prices that would increase until mid-year and that would remain high and relatively stable in the rest of 2022. It also assumes a less dynamic recovery in the supply of perishable foods as a result. of the high prices of agricultural inputs. Also, that oil prices begin to decline from the second half of this year, but from values higher than those considered in the previous Report. Faced with the same, a projected path of higher inflation could accentuate indexation and raise inflation expectations. Additionally, the reversal of the value added tax (VAT) reduction applied to cleaning and hygiene products due to the expiration of the health emergency would generate increases in the prices of these goods. Added to all this is the absence of excess productive capacity in the forecast horizon, with product gap levels close to
to zero and somewhat higher than projected last January. Thus, until June, annual inflation would continue at high levels similar to current levels, and then decline, although more slowly than projected in the previous report. The process of adjusting the monetary policy interest rate would contribute to inflation and its expectations resuming their convergence to the target in the forecast horizon. Thus, at the end of 2022 inflation would end up around 7.1% and then decrease to 4.8% in 2023.
Economic activity once again surprised on the upside and the economic growth forecast for 2022 increased from 4.3% to 5%. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the annual increase in product (10.7%), higher than estimated, was driven by the dynamics of domestic demand, mainly by the significant performance of private consumption, with levels much higher than those recorded before the pandemic. Investment also registered a significant recovery, but without reaching the levels of 2019 and with mixed behavior in its components. The trade balance deficit widened, with notable growth in imports similar to that of exports. Compared to the January Report, the economic monitoring index (ISE) for January and February suggests that the level of output in the first quarter would reach records higher than estimated and that the positive demand shock observed at the end of 2021 could be fading slower than anticipated. In the particular case of consumption, imports of goods of this type, retail trade figures, real income from restaurants and hotels, and credit card purchases indicate that household spending remains dynamic, with levels similar to those registered at the end of 2021. The figures for launches and initiations of works and imports of capital goods suggest that investment would continue to recover, but would maintain lower values than pre-pandemic levels. For the remainder of the year, consumption is expected to slow down from the high levels reached in the last two quarters in the environment of less comfortable internal and external financial conditions, exhaustion of the effect of dammed demand and deterioration of disposable income due to the increase of inflation. Investment would continue to recover, while the trade deficit would be reduced, favored by the high prices of oil and other basic goods exported by the country. With all this, economic growth of 7.2% (previously 5.2%) is projected for the first quarter and 5.0% (previously 4.3%) for all of 2022. In 2023, product growth would continue to moderate (2.9%, previously 3.1%), converging at rates close to long-term rates. The new estimates suggest that, in the forecast horizon, the output gap would remain at levels close to zero, but closer than projected in January. These economic activity forecasts continue to face high levels of uncertainty associated with geopolitical tensions and external financing conditions, the uncertainty of the electoral cycle and the evolution of the pandemic.
The projection of the growth of external demand was reduced, in a context of greater pressures on global inflation, high oil prices and international financial conditions that were less comfortable than those estimated in January. Russia's invasion of Ukraine and its upward effects on the prices of some agricultural goods and inputs and oil prices accentuated global inflationary pressures caused by supply restrictions and increased international costs. The drop in crude oil supply from Russia, low inventory levels and the persistence of production cuts by the Organization of Petroleum Producing Countries and its allies (OPEC+) explain the rise in the oil price assumption for 2022 (USD 100.8 per barrel, before USD 75.3 per barrel) and 2023 (USD 86.8 per barrel, before USD 71.2 per barrel). In the United States, the increase in inflation and its expectations, together with the good performance of the labor market and economic activity, increased the expected path of the interest rate of the Federal Reserve (Fed) for the present and the next. anus. The normalization of monetary policy in several developed and emerging economies, more persistent supply and cost shocks, and resurgences of Covid-19 in some Asian countries contributed to reducing the average growth forecast of the country's trading partners for 2022 (2.8%, previously 3.3%) and 2023 (2.4%, previously 2.6%). In this context, the projected path of the risk premium for the country increased, partly as a reflection of greater global geopolitical tensions, a less expansive monetary policy in the United States, the increase in the perception of risk for emerging markets and due to internal factors, such as accumulated macroeconomic imbalances and political uncertainty. All this is summarized in external financing conditions that are less comfortable than those estimated in January. However, the levels of uncertainty in external forecasts and their impact on the country's macroeconomic scenario remain high, given the unpredictable evolution of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, as well as the pandemic.
This macroeconomic scenario, characterized by high inflation, inflation forecasts and expectations above 3%, in addition to a product gap close to zero, implies a greater risk of unanchoring inflation expectations and a very limited space for monetary policy. expansive. Compared to the forecasts in the January Report, the performance of domestic demand has been more dynamic and excess productive capacity would have been closed more quickly. In addition to this factor, the upward surprises in total and core inflation are a reflection of stronger and more persistent external supply and cost shocks. Russia's invasion of Ukraine made supply constraints and international cost pressures more acute and persistent, and explained, in part, the increase in the forecast path of inflation, to levels above the target in the next two years . Inflation expectations increased again and exceed 3%. All of the above increased the risk of unanchoring inflation expectations and could generate widespread indexation processes that move inflation even further away from the target. This new macroeconomic context suggests that there would be very little room for an expansionary monetary policy.
